docs: add subgraph linter guide (#1065)
graphprotocol/docs: website/src/pages/en/subgraphs/guides/subgraph-linter.mdx

---
title: Subgraph Linter
sidebarTitle: Static Analysis with Subgraph Linter
---

[Subgraph Linter](https://github.com/graphops/subgraph-linter) is a static analysis tool for The Graph subgraphs. It analyzes your subgraph code before deployment and surfaces common patterns that lead to runtime crashes, corrupted entity state, silent data errors, or unnecessary performance overhead.

> Instead of discovering issues after deploying and indexing (or worse, after production failures), Subgraph Linter complements existing tooling to help you catch problems locally while you write code. It does not replace testing (either runtime or via unit tests), but it can dramatically reduce the class of bugs that ever make it to production deployments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It complements existing tools by helping you catch problems locally while writing code, rather than discovering them after deployment or in production. It does not replace testing (runtime or unit tests), but it can reduce the number of bugs that make it to production.
```

## Why run Subgraph Linter?

Subgraph handlers often fail in subtle ways that don’t show up until indexing starts:

- Entities are saved with missing required fields
- Multiple instances of the same entity handled at the same time causing overwrite issues
- Optional values are force-unwrapped without checks
- Divisions happen without proving the divisor is non-zero
- Derived fields are mutated directly or left stale
- Contract calls are made without being declared in the manifest

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Entities saved with missing required fields
- Entity overwrite issues from concurrent/stale instances
- Optional values force-unwrapped without checks
- Divisions without guaranteeing a non-zero denominator
- `@derivedFrom` fields mutated directly or left stale
- Contract calls are used without being declared in the manifest
```

- `unchecked-load`: Detects risky patterns where `Entity.load(...)` is treated as always present (for example via `!`) instead of explicitly handling the case where the entity doesn’t exist yet.
- `unchecked-nonnull`: Detects risky non-null assertions on values that can be missing at runtime, and encourages explicit guards instead of assuming the value is always set.
- `division-guard`: Detects divisions where the denominator may be zero on some execution paths, and suggests guarding the value before dividing.
- `derived-field-guard`: Detects cases where code updates “base” fields that require derived recomputation, but then saves without the helper(s) that keep derived values consistent.
- `helper-return-contract`: Detects helper functions that can return entities without fully initializing required fields, and flags call sites where the returned entity is used/saved without completing initialization.
- `undeclared-eth-call`: Detects contract calls made by a handler (including inside helpers it calls) that are not declared in the handler’s `calls:` block in `subgraph.yaml`, so you can add the declaration and align with Graph’s declared `eth_call` best practices.

> 

Reviewer: This whole section might work after the tutorial
Devs usually want the "how-to" right away

## Using Subgraph Linter

The tool can be run in two ways:

- As a CLI, suitable for local use or CI pipelines
- As a VS Code extension, using an LSP server to highlight issues inline as you code

### Using Subgraph Linter as CLI

Build the linter locally:

```bash
cd subgraph-linter
npm install
npm run build
```

Run it against a subgraph manifest:

```bash
npm run check -- --manifest ../your-subgraph/subgraph.yaml
```

If your repository uses a non-standard TypeScript setup, you can specify a `tsconfig.json`:

```bash
npm run check -- --manifest ../your-subgraph/subgraph.yaml --tsconfig ../your-subgraph/tsconfig.json
```

You can also provide an explicit config file:

```bash
npm run check -- --manifest ../your-subgraph/subgraph.yaml --config ./subgraph-linter.config.json
```

*Configuration note:* Subgraph Linter supports configurable severities per check. By default, checks have sensible severities, but you can override them to match your project’s tolerance. Only checks with effective severity `error` cause a non-zero exit code; warnings-only runs exit successfully.

> ### Configuration (severity overrides and suppression)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Configuration (severity overrides and suppression)
```
